---
Tags: 
Created: 2023-03-19 16:31:40
---
(Links:: [[Computer Organization]])
# Basic Concepts
- The maximum size of memory that can be used in a computer is determined by the addressing scheme.
- Computers with 16-bit addresses can address up to 64K memory locations.
- Machines with 32-bit addresses can utilize memory that contains up to 4G locations.
- Machines with 64-bit addresses can access up to 16E locations.
- The memory is usually designed to store and retrieve data in word-length quantities.
- The processor uses address, data, and control lines to specify memory locations and transfer data.
- The control lines carry the command indicating a Read or Write operation, as well as the timing information.
- The MFC signal is the processor's internal control signal indicating that the requested memory operation has been completed.
- *Memory access time* measures the time it takes for a memory unit to transfer a word of data
- *memory cycle time* is the minimum delay between two successive memory operations.
- A *random-access memory* (RAM) has the same access time to any location, while serial access storage devices have varying access times.
## Cache and Virtual Memory
- The memory access time can be a bottleneck in computer systems -> processor can process instructions and data faster than they can be fetched from memory
- Cache memory is a small, fast memory inserted between the main memory and the processor to hold currently active portions of a program and their data -> helps reduce the memory access time
- Virtual memory: only active portions of a program are stored in the main memory, while the rest is stored on a secondary storage device -> program sees a memory that is larger than the computer's physical main memory

## Block Transfers
- Data transfers between main memory, cache, and disks occur in contiguous blocks of tens, hundreds, or thousands of words, as well as with high-speed devices like graphic displays or Ethernet interfaces
# Semiconductor RAM Memories
## Internal Organization of Memory Chips
- Memory cells are usually organized in arrays, with each cell capable of storing one bit of information
- The cells in each column are connected to a Sense/Write circuit by two bit lines, and the Sense/Write circuits are connected to the data input/output lines of the chip
- Memory circuits can be organized in different ways, such as a 16 x 8 organization or a 1K x 1 organization
- Larger memory chips have essentially the same organization as small ones, but with a larger memory cell array and more external connections
## Statis Memories
- *static memories*: retain their state as long as power is applied.
- [[A static RAM cell.png]]
- **Read operation**: word line is activated; if the state is 1, then line $b$ is in state 1
- **Write operation**: Sense/Write circuit drives lines $b$ and $b'$ and activates word line
- **Cmos Cell**: low power consumption, since current flows in the call when is is being accessed
## Dynamic RAMs
- Static RAM (SRAM) cells are fast but require multiple transistors
- Dynamic RAM (DRAM) cells are less expensive and higher density but do not retain their state for a long period unless accessed frequently
- DRAM stores information in a capacitor charge that can only be maintained for tens of milliseconds, and contents must be periodically refreshed by restoring the capacitor charge to its full value
- DRAM cells consist of a capacitor and a transistor to store information by turning on the transistor and applying an appropriate voltage to the bit line
- DRAM contents must be read before the charge in the capacitor drops below a threshold value, which automatically refreshes the contents
- A 256-Megabit DRAM chip is organized in a 16K x 16K array, and 14 address bits are needed to select a row and another 11 bits to specify a group of 8 bits in the selected row, totaling a 25-bit address to access a byte
- The row and column addresses are multiplexed on 14 pins to reduce the number of external connections, and the RAS and CAS control signals are active when low in commercial DRAM chips
- The timing of DRAM operation is controlled by the RAS and CAS signals generated by an external memory controller circuit when the processor issues a Read or Write command, and the memory controller is responsible for refreshing the data stored in the memory chips.
- [[Internal organization of a 32M x 8 dynamic memory chip.png]]
### Fast Page Mode
- Each sense amplifier acts as a latch, when row address is applied, contents of all cells in selected row are loaded into corresponding latches
- All bytes in selected row can be transferred in sequential order using consecutive sequence of column addresses under the control of successive CAS signals
- Block transfer capability is referred to as the fast page mode feature
## Synchronous DRAMs
- Synchronous DRAMs (SDRAMs) have their operation synchronized with a clock signal
- SDRAMs incorporate control circuitry on the chip that provides many useful features, such as built-in refresh circuitry and buffered address and data connections
- SDRAMs have several modes of operation that can be selected by writing control information into a mode register
- Burst operations of different lengths can be specified, and it is not necessary to provide externally-generated pulses on the CAS line to select successive columns
- SDRAMs can deliver data at a very high rate, because all the control signals needed are generated inside the chip
- SDRAMs operate with clock speeds that can exceed 1 GHz
### Latency and Bandwidth
-  Memory latency is the time it takes to transfer the first word of a block.
- The time required to transfer a complete block depends on the rate at which successive words can be transferred and on the size of the block.
- The number of bits or bytes that can be transferred in one second is known as memory bandwidth.
- Memory bandwidth depends on the speed of access to the stored data and on the number of bits that can be accessed in parallel.
### Double-Data-Rate SDRAM
- large number of bits are accessed at the same time inside the chip when a row address is applied
- data transfered on rising and falling edges of the clock -> *double-data-rate SDRAMs* (DDR SDRAMs)
- DDR2 and DDR3 can operate at clock frequencies of 400 MHz and 800 MHz respectively.
- DDR2 and DDR3 can transfer data using effective clock speeds of 800 MHz and 1600 MHz respectively.
### Rambus Memory
- Rambus technology provides a high-speed interface between memory and processor for high data transfer rate.
- differential-signaling technique: signals are transmitted using small voltage swings of 0.1 V above and below a reference value
## Structure of Larger Memories
### Static Memory Systems
- [[Organization of a 2M x 32 memory module.png]]
- [[512 x 8 static memory chip.png]]
- Each column implemnets one byte position in a word with four chips providing 2M bytes
- Twenty-one address bits are needed to select a 32-bit word in this memory
- The high-order two bits of the address are decoded to determine which of the four rows should be selected
- Remaining 19 address bits are used to access specific byte locations inside each chip in the selected row
- The R/W inputs of all chips are tied together to provide a common Read/Write control line
### Dynamic Memory Systems
- Available dynamic RAM chips have capacities as high as 2G bits and even larger chips are being developed.
- Memory chips may be organized to read or write a number of bits in parallel to reduce the number of memory chips needed in a given computer.
- Memory modules are developed to house many memory chips on a small board that plugs into a socket on the computer's motherboard.
- Memory modules are commonly called SIMMs or DIMMs depending on the configuration of the pins.
- Different sized memory modules can use the same socket to easily expand total memory capacity.
### Memory Controller
- Dynamic RAM (DRAM) address has two parts: high-order bits select a row and low-order bits select a column.
- A memory controller is required to manage the DRAM operation, including multiplexing the address and generating RAS and CAS signals.
- The memory controller selects one of the memory modules based on the high-order bits of the address.
- Data lines connect the processor and the memory directly.
- DRAM needs to be refreshed periodically, and synchronous DRAM has the circuitry included to initiate the refresh cycles, while asynchronous DRAM requires a control circuit external to the chip to initiate the refresh cycles.
### Refresh Overhead
- Dynamic RAM needs internal refresh operation before responding to read or write requests
- Requests are delayed until the refresh cycle is completed
- Time lost to accommodate refresh operations is very small
- Refresh overhead for an SDRAM is less than 1 percent of the total time available for accessing the memory
- Refresh operations are arranged such that all rows of the chip are refreshed in 8K (8192) refresh cycles
### Choice of Technology
- Factors affecting choice of RAM chip: cost, speed, power dissipation, and size.
- Static RAM: fast operation, but expensive and low bit density due to complex circuitry.
	- Used where small, fast memory is needed.
- Dynamic RAM: high bit densities and low cost per bit.
- Synchronous DRAMs commonly used for implementing main memory.

---
References: